.\" @(#)$Id: jmlrac.1,v 1.6 2005/08/24 20:41:51 leavens Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2003 Iowa State University
.\"
.\" This file is part of JML
.\"
.\" JML is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" JML is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with JML; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to
.\" the Free Software Foundation, 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.TH JMLRAC l "$Date: 2005/08/24 20:41:51 $"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
jmlrac \- run Java programs compiled with the JML runtime assertion checker compiler
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR "jmlrac" " [--nocheckmodels] [java-option] ... FQClassName"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B jmlrac
runs a Java(TM) program, named in the \fBFQClassName\fR
argument, that has been compiled
using the JML runtime assertion checker compiler
.BR jmlc .
It provides the program access to classes
in the org.jmlspecs.jmlunit,
org.jmlspecs.models, and org.jmlspecs.jmlrac.runtime packages.
It also provides access to runtime assertion checked version of
interfaces in the J2SDK libraries (e.g., in java.lang and java.util).
Access to classes in org.jmlspecs.jmlunit and org.jmlspecs.models
are provided by adding to the end of the CLASSPATH environment variable
the files JML/bin/jmljunitruntime.jar and JML/bin/jmlmodels.jar.
Access to the other classes is done by
using the Xbootclasspath option of the
.B java
program, and using that option to add JML/bin/jmlruntime.jar
to the boot class path.
With this option set, it runs the
.B java
program, passing along the rest of the aguments.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-nocheckmodels
When this option is present, the JML models used are those in the jar
file JML/bin/jmlmodelsnonrac.jar, which does not do runtime assertion
checking in the org.jmlspecs.models and org.jmlspecs.models.resolve
packages.  The default is to use the models in JML/bin/jmlmodels.jar,
which does do runtime assertion of these types.
.PP
Aside from the \-\-nocheckmodels option,
this script simply passes along all its arguments to
.BR java ,
which should be consulted for details of its options.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Suppose that the files `PersonMain.java' and `Person.java' have been
compiled using jmlc(1).
Suppose furhter that both of these files contain the package statement
.RS
.nf
package org.jmlspecs.samples.jmltutorial;
.fi
.RE
and hence that they are in the org.jmlspecs.samples.jmltutorial package.
Then, assuming that the CLASSPATH environment variable includes the
directory just above the directory `org', one can run the `PersonMain'
class as compiled with jmlc as follows.
.RS
.nf
jmlrac org.jmlspecs.samples.jmltutorial.PersonMain
.fi
.RE
.PP
If you are using the jmlunit(1) tool, you may want to use the
jml-junit(1) script instead of
.BR jmlrac .
However, if you do not want graphical output from your junit tests,
you can use
.BR jmlrac
to run such tests.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.PP
During the execution of the program,
the
.B CLASSPATH
environment variable is changed by placing the JUnit jar file (`junit.jar'),
the JML/bin/jmljunitruntime.jar, and JML/bin/jmlmodels.jar files at
the end of the CLASSPATH during the run.  The 
JML/bin/jmlruntime.jar file is added to the bootclass path.
.PP
In the Unix version of this script,
the location of the JML installation's top directory
is taken from the JMLDIR environment variable, if
that is defined.
Similarly, the location of JUnit's top directory is taken from the
JUNITDIR environment variable, if that is defined.
.SH SEE ALSO
jmlc(1), java(1), javadoc(1), jml(1), jmldoc(1), jmlunit(1), jtest(1), jml-junit(1)
.SH COPYRIGHT
.PP
Copyright (c) 2001-2002 by Iowa State University
.PP
JML is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
any later version.
.PP
JML is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with JML; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to
the Free Software Foundation, 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
