.\" @(#)$Id: jmlre.1,v 1.1 2008/03/04 23:26:58 wahlst Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2003 Iowa State University
.\"
.\" This file is part of JML
.\"
.\" JML is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" JML is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with JML; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to
.\" the Free Software Foundation, 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.TH JMLRE l "$Date: 2008/03/04 23:26:58 $"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
jmlre \- run Java programs compiled with the JML executable specification compiler
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR "jmlre" " [java-option] ... FQClassName"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B jmlre
runs a Java(TM) program, named in the \fBFQClassName\fR
argument, that has been compiled
using the JML executable specification compiler
.BR jmle .
It provides the program access to classes
in the org.jmlspecs.jmlexec package 
by adding to the end of the CLASSPATH environment variable
the file JML/bin/jml-release.jar.
.SH OPTIONS
This script simply passes along all its arguments to
.B java ,
which should be consulted for details of its options.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Suppose that the file `Test.jml' has been
compiled using jmle(1), and that the file 'TestTest.java' (which has
a main method that creates
instances of class Test and uses them to call methods specified in
class Test) has been compiled using javac(1).
Then one can run the TestTest class as follows.
.RS
.nf
jmlre TestTest
.fi
.RE
.PP
If class TestTest is located in some package, then the fully qualified
package name should be specified in the command line to 
.B jmlre .
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.PP
During the execution of the program,
the
.B CLASSPATH
environment variable is changed by placing the JML release jar file 
(`jml-release.jar') at the end of the CLASSPATH during the run.
.PP
In the Unix version of this script,
the location of the JML installation's top directory
is taken from the JMLDIR environment variable, if
that is defined.
.SH SEE ALSO
jmle(1), jmlc(1), java(1), javadoc(1), jml(1), jmldoc(1), jmlunit(1), jtest(1), jml-junit(1)
.SH COPYRIGHT
.PP
Copyright (c) 2001-2002 by Iowa State University
.PP
JML is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
any later version.
.PP
JML is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with JML; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to
the Free Software Foundation, 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
